All right.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
So I hope you all got here safely through the
NOTE CONF
exciting wind at Idle Curiosity.
How many of you cycle?
NOTE CONF
Not very many.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's exciting time of year for cyclists.
Um, so I said we were beginning to move away
NOTE CONF
from logic.
We're still doing one more week of logic, but we're
NOTE CONF
doing logic from an engineer's viewpoint.
So it's actually possible that some of you already know
NOTE CONF
this stuff, so who knows.
Corner maps.
NOTE CONF
Okay, you can go to sleep for the week if
you want.
NOTE CONF
Or you might learn something new.
You never know.
NOTE CONF
As you can see from the slide, we're reaching into
the 20th century in terms of the work done, which
NOTE CONF
means that we're at the sad stage of the course
where every week I have to go and check whether
NOTE CONF
the people on my cover slides are still alive or
not.
NOTE CONF
And sadly, Maurice Connor died in my second year of
teaching the course.
NOTE CONF
I never met him.
He looks as if he was a lovely guy, but
NOTE CONF
I don't actually know that.
So the topic of today and to Thursday is Connor
NOTE CONF
maps.
What are coronal maps?
NOTE CONF
They're a way of extracting a formula from a picture.
So we've been using Venn diagrams to try to understand
NOTE CONF
formulae and kernel maps without going the other way.
What happens if you have the picture or the truth
NOTE CONF
table and you want to get a formula out of
it?
NOTE CONF
And this is something that engineers want to do because
engineers work in pictures.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to be stereotyping vigorously for the next week,
but you need to program informally.
NOTE CONF
So to set up the context, suppose we have two
predicates that we're thinking about called a and B.
NOTE CONF
How many different universes are there with A and B
predicates?
NOTE CONF
For I'm seeing a lot of some hands saying for
any want to choose anything other than four.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So that's how many different regions there are.
Now, is that the same as the number of universes
NOTE CONF
we can distinguish?
So because two predicates lets us to separate the universe
NOTE CONF
into four bits.
So in principle, we could construct a universe with different
NOTE CONF
things in each of those four bits, which might give
us a new idea about how many distinct universes there
NOTE CONF
are, which have just two predicates in them.
So the people who have four, do you feel inclined
NOTE CONF
to change your mind?
You've got four by going two to the two.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Or something like that.
NOTE CONF
So if I have A and B, I can describe
four regions of the universe.
NOTE CONF
Um, what does it mean for two universes to be
distinguishable?
NOTE CONF
Basically, it's whether they're inhabited.
Each region is inhabited or not.
NOTE CONF
Could be empty, could be inhabited.
So if I have four regions and each of them
NOTE CONF
can be either inhabited or empty.
How many different universes does that give me?
NOTE CONF
16.
So yeah, they look like that.
NOTE CONF
So that's quite a lot of different universes with predicates.
And you can obviously see what happens as you add
NOTE CONF
predicates.
Um, if we do the calculation, the numbers grow up.
NOTE CONF
Um, how many of you get extremely annoyed every time
some non-technical person talks about something increasing exponentially?
NOTE CONF
Right.
Hopefully by the end of this course, that will be
NOTE CONF
99.8% of you.
This is a case of exponential growth.
NOTE CONF
In fact, it's worse.
It's a case of doubly exponential gross growth, which is
NOTE CONF
a meaningful concept with four predicates.
There are 65,000 different universes that we could be talking
NOTE CONF
about.
And so one of the questions we might ask is
NOTE CONF
given a universe with these predicates, can we write down
the formula that describes it uniquely amongst all the other
NOTE CONF
universes?
So by example, if we're looking at this very simple
NOTE CONF
universe here, this is what we had as the syllogism,
as the categorical proposition.
NOTE CONF
Every B is A right.
So every B is a was our syllogism or categorical
NOTE CONF
proposition statement.
But can we just describe it in terms of Boolean
NOTE CONF
logic.
Well we look at it and say which regions are
NOTE CONF
inhabited.
The outside is that is, that is and this is
NOTE CONF
empty.
So we can just describe each region in term in
NOTE CONF
turn.
We can say not A or B, um, whereas not
NOTE CONF
A or B that's the outside or a or not,
b or not B is there or a and B
NOTE CONF
or the middle.
So it's okay for any of those to be inhabited.
NOTE CONF
And that's a brute force way of describing it.
Just looking at every inhabited region and saying that they
NOTE CONF
can all be inhabited, but this one isn't mentioned.
And so it's not going to be.
NOTE CONF
But that's certainly not the shortest formula we want.
And if we're going to describe this universe for circuit
NOTE CONF
layout tool or whatever it is we're doing.
So these were electronic engineers that did this or electrical
NOTE CONF
engineers.
The difference was less well defined in those days.
NOTE CONF
If we look at that formula, there are a bunch
of things we can do.
NOTE CONF
It can be simplified in various ways.
So it can be simplified like that by pulling out
NOTE CONF
A, not B.
Um, we could alternatively think about describing the places that
NOTE CONF
are empty.
So this region here is what region is this B
NOTE CONF
and not a b and not a.
And that must be false.
NOTE CONF
So we could describe this universe by saying that B
and not A must be false negating it.
NOTE CONF
And then we could apply to Morgan's law if we
want it and say it's A or not B.
NOTE CONF
So a bunch of formulae, all of which are equivalent,
all of which describe this universe.
NOTE CONF
And the question is, if I give you something that
is not just a two predicate picture where you have
NOTE CONF
16 choices, but a four for a picture where you
have 65,000 choices, how can you go from the picture
NOTE CONF
which you can't understand, or the truth table To a
formula that uniquely characterises the universe.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Do you get what we're trying to do?
NOTE CONF
Extract here?
Um, I can increase it by one tiny notch, and
NOTE CONF
otherwise I can try putting this closer.
Does that help?
NOTE CONF
Okay, thanks.
Um, so the idea here is getting a logical description
NOTE CONF
from something that is either a picture or just the
truth table, because these pictures are our graphical way of
NOTE CONF
representing truth tables in one way.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I have a little side issue here.
This is actually a relevant side issue for computer scientists.
NOTE CONF
Um, back in the olden days.
And actually, still, you probably don't need to think about
NOTE CONF
it.
But back in the olden days, discs were expensive, and
NOTE CONF
when you bought a 200 gigabyte disk, you expected to
be able to fit 200GB of files on it.
NOTE CONF
And it was very annoying to find out that you
could only fit 195GB or whatever it is on it.
NOTE CONF
And the reason for that was because disk manufacturers use
the C prefix giga, which means multiply by ten to
NOTE CONF
the nine, whereas most things in computer science use the
binary.
NOTE CONF
I hope that computer's not about to explode.
Most things in computer science use the binary prefix.
NOTE CONF
We say giga, but usually we don't mean multiply by
ten to the minus nine.
NOTE CONF
Usually we mean multiply by ten to the 30, which
is 1074 Around 74 million, roughly, instead of a thousand
NOTE CONF
million.
So this was a great source of annoyance for a
NOTE CONF
large portion of my life.
And eventually somebody, although not the people who define.
NOTE CONF
So I decided that the computing industry really needed binary
prefixes.
NOTE CONF
So some of you may have seen these, some of
you may know them, but some of you may have
NOTE CONF
seen them without knowing them.
They are actually a useful thing to know.
NOTE CONF
So you will see people in computer science and the
other binary oriented subjects talking about Chip, maybe, and Gibby,
NOTE CONF
meaning multiply by two to the 10,024.
So when we say kilobyte in computer science, we always
NOTE CONF
mean KiB byte.
Nobody ever means a thousand bytes when they say kilobyte.
NOTE CONF
Likewise megabytes, likewise gigabytes when you're talking about memory.
But as I said, the disk manufacturers and also the
NOTE CONF
tape manufacturers used to talk about gigabytes in the sense
of ten to the nine.
NOTE CONF
So that's just a little side issue.
Um, incidentally, this is another completely random thing I said.
NOTE CONF
Tape.
Have any of you ever written files onto a tape
NOTE CONF
of any kind?
Nobody.
NOTE CONF
Do you think tape still exists as a storage medium?
Okay, 95% of you are very wrong.
NOTE CONF
Tape is still the large scale storage medium of choice,
and the capacities increase incredibly every 5 or 10 years.
NOTE CONF
Which surprised me because even when I was a student
40 years ago, people thought tape was on the way
NOTE CONF
out.
And 20 years ago people thought tape was definitely dead.
NOTE CONF
But it just keeps on going like mainframes.
So if we've got a way of looking at a
NOTE CONF
picture with 65 different universes, 64 different universes, and turning
it into a formula, except that I haven't told you
NOTE CONF
any human comprehensible way of looking at a huge picture
and extracting a formula from it.
NOTE CONF
So how do we do that?
There are algorithmic ways to simplify Boolean formulae, and we
NOTE CONF
will be talking about those a little bit later.
But as I said this is engineering.
NOTE CONF
And engineers are pragmatic people.
And what we're going to talk about now is a
NOTE CONF
very human way of simplifying a formula.
So what are humans good at?
NOTE CONF
Humans are not good at a lot of the things
that computers are good at.
NOTE CONF
We are not good at doing calculations.
We are not good at manipulating large amounts of data.
NOTE CONF
We are very, very good at spotting patterns in things,
and there are all sorts of good evolutionary reasons for
NOTE CONF
that.
The evo psych people will tell you, because it's important
NOTE CONF
to recognise the pattern of a pounce of a tiger
waiting to jump.
NOTE CONF
And I don't know whether you believe evolutionary psychology, but
I suppose there's probably something in it.
NOTE CONF
And it's a side issue.
We do have bits in our brain, or at least
NOTE CONF
do we know that humans do.
We know that other animals have bits in their brain
NOTE CONF
that respond to specific patterns, like patterns of vertical stripes,
or even individual clumps of neurones or neurones that do
NOTE CONF
that.
So it's quite deeply ingrained in our brains, and it's
NOTE CONF
not a conscious intellectual thing, but pattern recognition is something
we do.
NOTE CONF
Which is why all these annoying are you a human
things on And websites try to get you to recognise
NOTE CONF
patterns that have been confused in a way that makes
them hard for machines to do so.
NOTE CONF
The corner map is a way of drawing out a
truth table and colouring it to make it easy to
NOTE CONF
pull out a boolean formula, and even better than that,
to pull out a short Boolean formula.
NOTE CONF
So here's a truth table involving the predicates A and
B.
NOTE CONF
I think it's probably the one we looked at earlier.
What can we do to try to identify a nice
NOTE CONF
short formula that describes it?
Do we need to discuss what it means for a
NOTE CONF
formula to be short?
I mean, technically we should have some definition, but the
NOTE CONF
number of symbols in it will do for now.
So what we can do is highlight the cells that
NOTE CONF
are true.
So this is the bits of the universe that can
NOTE CONF
be inhabited, which in our case was the the left
hand side in the previous picture.
NOTE CONF
And stare at it and try to cover it by
rectangles.
NOTE CONF
So this is a bit like an IQ test I
suppose, but it's a very easy IQ test.
NOTE CONF
I can't do IQ tests, so I like easy IQ
tests.
NOTE CONF
If we look at this and try to cover it
by even rectangles.
NOTE CONF
Now, what do I mean by even rectangles?
I'll tell you a bit, tell you that more precisely
NOTE CONF
later.
But if you want to cover this L shape by
NOTE CONF
a couple of rectangles as simply as possible, what are
you going to do?
NOTE CONF
I could cover it by three, one by one squares.
Right?
NOTE CONF
But is that the simplest thing to do?
So for some people, it's the simplest.
NOTE CONF
For others it isn't.
So what's an alternative?
NOTE CONF
One square off, one square on top and a rectangle
on the bottom.
NOTE CONF
Now bear in mind that these are boolean values, so
it doesn't matter if I overlap them.
NOTE CONF
The stem of the L and the leg of the
L.
NOTE CONF
So we've got several possibilities.
Which one is nice?
NOTE CONF
So the one I just mentioned is to do that
and that.
NOTE CONF
Um, now I claim that that is something that is
particularly short because it gives you a nice short description.
NOTE CONF
In particular, it gives me the description of the L
in terms of the things that are a so where
NOTE CONF
is A1 there.
And together with the things that are not B.
NOTE CONF
So if I cover the L by two rectangles, then
I get a formula coming out which is of the
NOTE CONF
form A or not B, which I claim is a
nice short formula.
NOTE CONF
If I did that division, which was one of the
earlier suggestions, the square at the top and the rectangle
NOTE CONF
along the bottom, what formula would I get out of
it?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I don't see.
NOTE CONF
I mean, eventually I would.
So how would I get that?
NOTE CONF
I mean, let's not do anything clever yet.
Let's just describe the picture in front of us.
NOTE CONF
And or not.
And so I'm trying to describe a single square on
NOTE CONF
the top, which is defined as not a.
And then I'm trying to describe the rectangle on the
NOTE CONF
bottom.
Which is um a.
NOTE CONF
Um, now if you simplify that formula, of course you
get back to the one that we found by covering
NOTE CONF
it with two rectangles.
But the nice thing about looking for the biggest rectangles
NOTE CONF
that cover the shape is that you get the short
formula out by staring at that, rather than by having
NOTE CONF
to do simplification.
Notice by the way, that when I try to describe
NOTE CONF
a single square in this diagram, I have to talk
about two variables because I'm identifying one cell in a
NOTE CONF
two dimensional array.
When I talk about a row, then I only need
NOTE CONF
to mention one variable.
So the bigger the rectangle I'm describing, the fewer variables
NOTE CONF
I have to specify to say what it is, and
that makes for short formulae.
NOTE CONF
So that's why we look for the largest even rectangle.
I said I'd tell you what I mean by an
NOTE CONF
even rectangle.
I don't actually mean that it has an even number
NOTE CONF
of cells in it.
I mean that its width and height are powers of
NOTE CONF
two so that it divides.
It's either half a table or quarter of a table,
NOTE CONF
or an eighth of a table, so that it covers
one particular variable value.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We should, uh, make sure that we've got this two
variable case sorted out.
NOTE CONF
So do you see what we're doing?
Should we do another example?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Let's call.
It.
NOTE CONF
C and D.
No it's not.
NOTE CONF
Call it C and D, let's call it p and
q this time.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
My ones are becoming more and more continental.
NOTE CONF
Sure.
Um, what truth table shall we do?
NOTE CONF
Something could do.
Something perverse.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Trouble is, they're all rather boring.
NOTE CONF
Somebody give me one.
Somebody just read out for binary digits.
NOTE CONF
Say for binary digits to me.
The identity function.
NOTE CONF
Equality function.
Now, that's a nasty one.
NOTE CONF
Why is it a nasty one?
It doesn't have any interesting rectangles.
NOTE CONF
It just has one by one squares.
So if we tediously do it.
NOTE CONF
What formula do we get out?
So people at the front sort of keep quiet for
NOTE CONF
a moment, because the other people need to think for
a bit.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Can anybody at least halfway back shout out a formula?
NOTE CONF
For.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Not P and not Q.
That describes that single cell there or P and Q
NOTE CONF
which describes that soul there.
So that's an ugly shape.
NOTE CONF
It has a long formula.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There are of course 16 possible examples we can do.
I'm not sure it's useful to go through too many
NOTE CONF
more of them, but the basic principle is hopefully reasonably
clear.
NOTE CONF
It's about to get a bit more exciting because it's
a rare situation that, you know, you only have four
NOTE CONF
variables.
I mean, actually in modern world, it's a rare situation
NOTE CONF
that you only have any reasonable number of variables.
But this is back in the old days of manual
NOTE CONF
circuit design.
So just before I go on, any immediate questions about
NOTE CONF
what's going on here?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Engineers extended this up to four.
In fact, they extended it up to six or even
NOTE CONF
eight variables.
But that's actually more than my brain can cope with.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to stick to four variables.
How can we write down a truth table for four
NOTE CONF
variables.
So if you think about what a truth table for
NOTE CONF
four variables ought to look like, it ought to be
a four dimensional table.
NOTE CONF
And we are not terribly good at writing down and
visualising four dimensional tables.
NOTE CONF
And some of you may possibly have tried how many
people had an obsessive phase of drawing hyper cubes?
NOTE CONF
Nobody sad.
It's when you try to draw the hyper, hyper hyper
NOTE CONF
cues that it gets exciting.
You get pretty patterns.
NOTE CONF
Um, and just as a side, if you I did
once visit A computer science stroke electronics department, which had
NOTE CONF
an immersive four dimensional display navigation system where you could
walk into this planetarium like room and steer yourself around
NOTE CONF
a four dimensional universe.
It was a seasick inducing.
NOTE CONF
So what I've done here is write down a four
dimensional truth table by clumping together two of the variables.
NOTE CONF
So I've got A and B, and I'm writing down
combined values.
NOTE CONF
So A is zero, B is zero, a is zero,
b is one as b as one, b is one,
NOTE CONF
and so on.
Similarly, along the top I've written down combined values of
NOTE CONF
two variables c and d.
Now you'll notice that I have not written these values
NOTE CONF
in the natural order.
So I've gone in.
NOTE CONF
Normally you would expect to go 00011011 because that's how
we count.
NOTE CONF
At least it's how we count when we've mastered binary,
which hopefully you all did many years ago.
NOTE CONF
Instead, I've written them in this order, and this is
a very clever and nice little trick.
NOTE CONF
So the phrase for writing things in this order is
writing them as a grey code, which Wikipedia will tell
NOTE CONF
you more about if you want to know.
Um, the nice thing about it is that as you
NOTE CONF
move from one column to another, only one variable is
changing its values.
NOTE CONF
So when I move from zero to 0 to 0,
one d is changing.
NOTE CONF
When I move from zero 1 to 1 one, then
C is changing.
NOTE CONF
When I move from one 1 to 1 zero, then
D is changing.
NOTE CONF
Um, why is that nice?
It partly makes the extraction of rectangles easier, and also
NOTE CONF
it avoids a problem that is important in circuit design,
which is race conditions.
NOTE CONF
So those of you who are doing hardware are going
to come across race conditions and we will see.
NOTE CONF
We will mention briefly at the end of this section
how this grey code stuff helps you with that.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what am I going to do?
Well, I can do things like identify a region.
NOTE CONF
So here is a rectangle.
It's an even rectangle.
NOTE CONF
And this is characterised by the variable a being one.
So if you look at the rows here, it's the
NOTE CONF
rows where a is one and c and d or
anything.
NOTE CONF
What happens if I want to look at the region
where b is one.
NOTE CONF
I get that.
So again if I look at the region where B
NOTE CONF
is one, I get a nice contiguous rectangle.
And this wouldn't happen if I wrote these combined values
NOTE CONF
in the usual order.
So something you should do after the lecture is convince
NOTE CONF
yourself of that.
Write out the truth table in the usual order and
NOTE CONF
see how you wouldn't get nice rectangles.
So this describes the region where b is one.
NOTE CONF
And similarly this is the region where c is one,
and this is the region where d is one.
NOTE CONF
So any place where one variable takes on A a
true value is nicely described by a two by four
NOTE CONF
rectangle in the table.
But of course we also want to think about what
NOTE CONF
happens when variables are false, because we might need to
describe a universe in which variables take false values.
NOTE CONF
And at first sight, it might look as if this
isn't going to work so nicely.
NOTE CONF
So if I look at.
The.
NOTE CONF
Places where A is zero light pink, then I get
this nice two by four rectangle.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But if I want to look at the places where
NOTE CONF
B is zero, I get that.
And at first sight that's not a two by four
NOTE CONF
rectangle.
Last time we had a discussion about geometry.
NOTE CONF
So here's some geometry.
The keyword is in the title of the slide.
NOTE CONF
On what surface?
If we do this to this truth table on a
NOTE CONF
suitable surface, we could make this thing be actually a
rectangle.
NOTE CONF
Um, and now I get to the question who remembers
what a torus is?
NOTE CONF
Okay, who thinks they should remember what a torus is
and who is quite sure they've never heard the word.
NOTE CONF
Okay, a torus is a ring doughnut.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, I don't know why mathematicians can't call it.
I suppose because doughnut is an ambiguous word.
NOTE CONF
There are wing doughnuts, and there are proper doughnuts with
a hole in the middle and jam that squirts out.
NOTE CONF
But if we draw the truth table on a torus
on a ring doughnut, then both the zero values and
NOTE CONF
the one values are rectangles.
So the same happens with c and d.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is where c is zero and this is
where d is zero.
NOTE CONF
And the way we think about it is like this.
So values wrap around from the beginning.
NOTE CONF
They wrap around from the right to the left.
So if I go right from here I end up
NOTE CONF
here.
If I go up from here I end up at
NOTE CONF
the bottom and so on and so on.
And there is a picture which I googled up because
NOTE CONF
I don't know any graphics package well enough to draw
a coloured torus, but fortunately somebody else does.
NOTE CONF
Um, So this is a picture of the truth table
with slightly different colours drawn on a torus.
NOTE CONF
So I've got red and blue and green and yellow
instead of my colours, but roughly it matches.
NOTE CONF
So this is strictly speaking it's due to a two
dimensional geometry, but it's two dimensional geometry on an interestingly
NOTE CONF
curved surface.
And many of us are not very good at thinking
NOTE CONF
about these things.
Um, I have lousy geometrical visualisation capacities.
NOTE CONF
Um, in fact, the other day I found a courier's
report from when I was 16, which said I had
NOTE CONF
lousy spatial visualisation capacities.
It's still true.
NOTE CONF
But fortunately, we can look at it, look at truth
tables and do it more diagrammatically.
NOTE CONF
Um, any questions at this point?
I think examples are what we need to see how
NOTE CONF
to do this successfully, what I need it.
I, by the way, knew none of this before I
NOTE CONF
started teaching the course because not being an actual computer
scientist by origin, I managed to avoid this bit of
NOTE CONF
electronics.
Um, so here's a four dimensional truth table.
NOTE CONF
It has a bunch of zeros and it has a
bunch of ones.
NOTE CONF
This is an easy one.
What's the easiest rectangle that describes it?
NOTE CONF
I mean, it's.
The simplest possible thing, the square in the middle.
NOTE CONF
And somebody said that's B and D.
Why is it B and D.
NOTE CONF
Because this is where B is one and this is
where d is one.
NOTE CONF
Um okay.
So far so good.
NOTE CONF
That was what we got that everybody see that?
No.
NOTE CONF
Anybody worried about it?
Not quite sure.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Here's another one.
NOTE CONF
Also straightforward.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
Be a Nazi.
NOTE CONF
So just look at the rectangle.
Look at the rows that describe it.
NOTE CONF
It's the rose where B is one.
Look at the columns that describe is the rose where
NOTE CONF
c is zero.
Um so that's a nice easy case.
NOTE CONF
We're going to do another couple of easy cases before
getting on to slightly more challenging ones.
NOTE CONF
What about this one?
This is also something where there are four true souls,
NOTE CONF
but now they're laid out all in a row instead
of in a nice little square.
NOTE CONF
Does that make a difference to how complex the formula
is?
NOTE CONF
Not really.
Um, that's my rectangle I'm trying to cover.
NOTE CONF
And if I try to describe it, it's this row,
which is where A is zero and B is zero.
NOTE CONF
So this is described by not A and not be.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions so far.
Anybody not follow any of these.
NOTE CONF
And is willing to admit it which is always the
hard part.
NOTE CONF
What about this one.
Mhm.
NOTE CONF
So again, looking looking at the people a few rows
back, how many rectangles are there to cover?
NOTE CONF
Okay, lots of people are getting it good.
So this is the tricky one where we say looks
NOTE CONF
like there are two rectangles, but there's only one because
this can wrap around.
NOTE CONF
And actually we just have a square again.
And this is the cute bit.
NOTE CONF
So this is just a and sorry not A and
not D.
NOTE CONF
By the same principle.
This rectangle here which wraps round is uh where a
NOTE CONF
is zero and d is false.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's more or less it.
It's not quite it.
NOTE CONF
There's a couple of other cases.
So everybody see that one now.
NOTE CONF
Because if you see this one then essentially you're done.
Yeah yeah.
NOTE CONF
Anybody.
Not yet see it.
NOTE CONF
I'm willing to say so.
That's right.
NOTE CONF
We're going to be done with week six, but maybe
not quite.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Okay, so here's a slightly more complex example.
NOTE CONF
Now we have two rectangles apparently.
Can we do anything about this or do we just
NOTE CONF
have to say we have two rectangles.
And if we have two rectangles what's the formula that
NOTE CONF
comes out of it?
Well, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So if we have two things to deal with, then
we need to all them together, as we did with
NOTE CONF
that example there.
We had two one by one cells and we ored
NOTE CONF
them together.
Here we can't do anything clever.
NOTE CONF
We just have to recognise that there's a two by
two cell and a two by two cell here.
NOTE CONF
They don't overlap, they're just completely distinct.
So the shortest sensible description or the shortest description we
NOTE CONF
can obviously extract of this table is the red cells
or the green cells which are not A and not
NOTE CONF
C or A and C.
Everybody happy with that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So here's the one that sometimes catches people.
NOTE CONF
How many rectangles?
One.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
I'm just looking at some people to see if they're
going to change their minds as they hear other people.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So I think we have quite a lot of votes
for one.
NOTE CONF
Why do we have quite a lot of votes for
one?
NOTE CONF
Because this is the tricky thing.
The torus bends meets itself both ways that way and
NOTE CONF
that way.
So the four corners are actually all next to each
NOTE CONF
other.
So this is a single two by two cell.
NOTE CONF
And if you look at the description of it then
you can see that it's where um in fact where
NOTE CONF
is it.
It's where.
NOTE CONF
C d is zero and d is zero because it's
those two columns and um, b is zero because it's
NOTE CONF
those two rows.
So not b and not d.
NOTE CONF
Um.
That's probably quite tricky.
NOTE CONF
And notice again we've found in this diagram we found
a single two by two cell.
NOTE CONF
So we've got a nice short formula with just two
variables in it.
NOTE CONF
So of course this is a general thing.
If we see a one by one cell we get
NOTE CONF
a variable with four things anded together.
If we saw a one by two cell, we would
NOTE CONF
have three variables added together.
When we see a two by two cell, we get
NOTE CONF
two variables and so on.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So that's the complex toroidal one.
I'm happy with that.
NOTE CONF
Anybody not see what we're doing there?
Willie, I should come in with a flotation aid.
NOTE CONF
Appropriately coloured.
Um, what about this one?
NOTE CONF
So now things are getting a little bit more complex,
and you might need to ponder this one for a
NOTE CONF
bit.
What a natural ways to.
NOTE CONF
There are quite a few different ways we could cover
this with rectangles.
NOTE CONF
The question is, which one is a good one or
which ones might we try?
NOTE CONF
Probably.
You have several possibilities.
NOTE CONF
Um, was anybody thinking of this one?
So this looks pretty straightforward, right?
NOTE CONF
We're looking for even rectangles.
We've got a column of two there.
NOTE CONF
And we've got a column sorry a square here.
And if we describe each of them in turn we
NOTE CONF
get not a not c, not d, b, not c,
d and a c as descriptions of the three squares
NOTE CONF
there.
Um, in this particular case, there isn't anything better we
NOTE CONF
can do.
We could cover it with a different assortment of rectangles,
NOTE CONF
perhaps, but it wouldn't make any difference.
So now.
NOTE CONF
Let's think about something a little bit more complex.
Have a look at this one.
NOTE CONF
And think about what's the obvious thing to do.
Who thinks this is the obvious thing to do?
NOTE CONF
I think it's the obvious thing to do.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Anybody think it's not the obvious thing to do?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What's the obvious thing to do?
Okay, so.
NOTE CONF
Ah, but we can't do that because three is not
an even rectangle.
NOTE CONF
So we can't go that and that because that would
give us a three by one which isn't allowed.
NOTE CONF
So rectangles with sides that are powers of two.
This seems like the obvious thing to do.
NOTE CONF
What happens if we do that?
We get a nasty long formula because it's describing a
NOTE CONF
single cell in here.
So this cell is described by A and B and
NOTE CONF
not c and d.
And then this square is described by a and c.
NOTE CONF
So we all them together.
And if we get a formula with six symbols in
NOTE CONF
it could we do any better.
Could we be a little bit sneaky and make the
NOTE CONF
formula slightly shorter?
The one in the middle who just had it be
NOTE CONF
a rectangle.
Mhm.
NOTE CONF
Let's see if anybody else further back can come up
with that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
If we overlap things we can do a little bit
NOTE CONF
better.
So this is legitimate, perfectly fine for things to be
NOTE CONF
overlapping because we're oring all these things together.
So it doesn't matter if we cover a particular cell
NOTE CONF
twice.
And by having this redundant cell here, we have saved
NOTE CONF
one variable in this pink clause and turned it from
a four variable clause into a three variable clause, which
NOTE CONF
doesn't sound like a big deal, but when you're doing
this on a much larger scale, then it becomes useful.
NOTE CONF
And also for sheer human comprehensibility, 2 or 3 years
about our limit.
NOTE CONF
Um.
That is actually all I wanted to say about carnal
NOTE CONF
maps before we go and talk about what we're actually
doing when we do carnal maps.
NOTE CONF
So after this, we're going to go on and talk
about symbolic manipulations of formulae which are doing the same
NOTE CONF
thing algorithmically and deterministically.
So kernel maps are great, but what's the defect?
NOTE CONF
The defect is they are using human pattern matching capabilities,
which computers by definition do not have.
NOTE CONF
We can program them in, but it's a bit of
well, I suppose these days someone has almost certainly made
NOTE CONF
a large language model that looks at a truth table
and does tries to into a kernel map.
NOTE CONF
In fact, you lot probably use ChatGPT and friends all
the time, right?
NOTE CONF
So those of you who use any of you using
one with visual capabilities yet, okay, have a play.
NOTE CONF
See whether it can do corner maps.
Most likely it can, because there's a fairly small.
NOTE CONF
I have better things to do with my life than
use ChatGPT, so I'm going to leave it to you
NOTE CONF
to do that.
Um, before we finish any questions about this?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So can I have some quiet for the question, please?
NOTE CONF
So it.
Is.
NOTE CONF
What?
It is.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So you mean the lectures are a bit out of
NOTE CONF
sync?
Because this is a, um.
NOTE CONF
That's just because I'm.
I slowed down a bit, and we might as well
NOTE CONF
get ahead a bit, because then if anything goes wrong,
we don't have to have an extra lecture to catch
NOTE CONF
up.
So I'm in two minds about what to do next
NOTE CONF
week, so I will continue with the week six material
on Thursday.
NOTE CONF
On Friday, depending on the negotiation I'm having with Don,
there are a couple of possibilities.
NOTE CONF
I could give you the day off, or I could
do a voluntary lecture on something more sophisticated for whoever
NOTE CONF
feels like turning up.
Um, whatever.
NOTE CONF
So I'll think about it and decide.
See you.
NOTE CONF
Uh, see you on Thursday.